---
layout: post
title: "On Adventure and Reaching Out"
date: 2013-11-18 09:36:14 -0400
categories: hustle
---

I’m currently sitting in my new apartment, watching the sun rise over the monstrous Andes, warming
up with a fresh cup of coffee, and wondering how the hell I ended up over 8500 kilometers away from
home with a $40,000 grant from the Chilean government. Prior to this adventure I had never been to
South America, my Spanish was mediocre at best, and the closest thing I knew to Latin culture was
grabbing a breakfast burrito from the local taco stand in my small hometown in Southern California.
I would like to believe that I ended up here by my own doing, like some sort of fearless pirate
whose crew had abandoned him. This couldn’t be further from the truth. The reason I’m here has
little to do with my own intelligence, grades, or luck. I wouldn’t consider myself a smart person.
My grades are pretty average, and the best luck I’ve recently had was finding 100 pesos on the
ground, which at today’s exchange rate could buy me a lollipop. The real reason why I’m here is
because of the wisdom, encouragement, and patience of those that I have luckily found myself
surrounded by. Steve Jobs put it best when he said “You can’t connect the dots looking forward you
can only connect them looking backwards.” So, that is exactly what this post aims to do - connect
the dots and make sense of how I ended up here, and hopefully encourage a few others to expand their
horizons because it has never been easier.

## “Where our potential network of friends was once dictated by the number of people that lived in our home town, it is now relative to the number of people on the internet.”

We happen to be living in very exciting times. The public World Wide Web recently turned 20 years
old, we found out the United States has been spying on us for years (read: Edward Snowden), but even
more exciting, we know that there are more than **2.7 billion** internet users worldwide. It has never
been easier to connect with anyone in the entire world. Where our potential network of friends was
once dictated by the number of people that lived in our home town, it is now relative to the number
of people using the internet. Where we once had to send a letter, or make a phone call to connect
with those outside of our friend circle, we can now send an email, post a tweet, write a Facebook
message, comment on tumblr…and the list goes on. The point is that in today’s connected world there
is **no reason** you shouldn’t be talking to the people that inspire you the most. Over the course
of the past couple of weeks I’ve been thinking hard about the decisions that have had a large,
positive impact on my life. I never thought a bunch of extremely talented developers writing code
far superior to mine would be more than willing to take time out of their day to share a beer in
their office and discuss how I could improve my programming techniques. I never knew that the answer
to a difficult problem, no matter how simple the solution, was just a tweet away. But most of all I
never understood what the word *networking* meant. The word still brings to mind images of young
adults in suits flaunting leather resume holders, grinning and agreeing with everything the speaker
at the job fair happens to be talking about. Call it networking, making friends, or just a step
closer to another reason to have a beer with someone, but reaching out to others is one of the most
powerful actions you can take to get to where you want to be.

## “Armed with an internet connection and a little curiosity it is possible to reach just about anyone in the world”

Andy happened to be publishing some pretty interesting posts on his personal blog. These posts
covered anything from a quest to find his new
[favorite beer](http://www.andyellwood.com/2013/02/hobbies-and-hopheads/) to [how bodysurfing and success](http://www.andyellwood.com/2013/06/wave-on-wave/) follow a
similar pattern. After following his blog for some time I decided I needed to get a hold of him if
even to just see if he would respond to a 19-year-old beach bum from Southern California. So, about
a year ago I sent Andy a simple email asking for some book recommendations. To my amazement I opened
my inbox a few days later to see a new message with a complete list of books to read and some words
of encouragement. Why would such a busy guy go out of his way to respond to an email from me? I’ve
never had a [Forbes column](https://www.forbes.com/sites/andyellwood/#3c4d23477bdc) and I have never been a part of [an acquisition](http://mashable.com/2011/12/05/facebooks-acquires-gowalla/#SDris0q1Qkqp), let alone [two](https://www.wired.com/2013/06/google-waze-acquisition/). It turns
out that most people actually want to see you succeed. They have been in your position and have no
problem sharing some lessons learned along the way. This single email opened up an entire new world
to me. Armed with an internet connection and a little curiosity it is possible to reach just about
anyone in the world.

## “Start today because everyone knows the best time to start was yesterday”

Spring semester was quickly winding down and I needed to figure out what I was going to do for the
next few months. Once again I turned to those who had been there before and sent Andy another email.
While I didn’t get a list of books to read I did get some more words of encouragement and an email
introduction to a friend of Andy’s working on a cool project in Chile. A few weeks later I would
find out that I needed to hop on a plane to Santiago, Chile. Myself and two co-founders had been
accepted into Startup Chile’s 7th generation and granted a $40,000 equity-free grant to relocate to
Santiago and work with teams from 28 different countries to work on launching a product, while
helping the country achieve its goal of transforming itself into the technology hub of Latin
America.

Since then I have made it a routine to reach out to those I find most interesting and encourage you
to do the same. If you try a product and like it tweet at the creators and tell them what about it
you enjoyed. Likewise, if you try a product and don’t like it let those involved know what you think
could be improved. Find yourself checking someone’s blog every day and really relating to the
content? Email them. Tweet them. Message them. I guarantee that the majority of the time you will
get a thoughtful response. The only way to get better at something is to practice. **So start today
because everyone knows the best time to start was yesterday.**

Feel free to start now [@askwheeler](https://twitter.com/askwheeler)

Thanks [@andyellwood](https://twitter.com/andyellwood)
